# Strongyloides-Free-Living-Thermosensory-Behaviors
Data and analysis repository for Gregory et al 2024, "Thermosensory behaviors of the free-living life stages of <i>Strongyloides</i> species support parasitism in tropical environments".

## Abstract
Soil-transmitted parasitic nematodes infect over 1 billion people worldwide and are a common source of neglected disease. <i>Strongyloides stercoralis</i> is a potentially fatal skin-penetrating human parasite that is endemic to tropical and subtropical regions around the world. The complex life cycle of <i>Strongyloides</i> species is unique among human-parasitic nematodes in that it includes a single free-living generation featuring soil-dwelling, bacterivorous adults whose progeny all develop into infective larvae. The sensory behaviors that enable free-living <i>Strongyloides</i> adults to navigate and survive soil environments are unknown. <i>S. stercoralis</i> infective larvae display parasite-specific sensory-driven behaviors, including robust attraction to mammalian body heat. In contrast, the free-living model nematode <i>Caenorhabditis elegans</i> displays thermosensory behaviors that guide adult worms to stay within a physiologically permissive range of environmental temperatures. Do <i>S. stercoralis</i> and <i>C. elegans</i> free-living adults, which experience similar environmental stressors, display common thermal preferences? Here, we characterize the thermosensory behaviors of the free-living adults of <i>S. stercoralis</i> as well as those of the closely related rat parasite, <i>Strongyloides ratti</i>. We find that <i>Strongyloides</i> free-living adults are exclusively attracted to near-tropical temperatures, despite their inability to infect mammalian hosts. We further show that lifespan is shorter at higher temperatures for free-living <i>Strongyloides</i> adults, similar to the effect of temperature on <i>C. elegans</i> lifespan. However, we also find that the reproductive potential of the free-living life stage is enhanced at warmer temperatures, particularly for <i>S. stercoralis</i>. Together, our results reveal a novel role for thermotaxis to maximize the infectious capacity of obligate parasites and provide insight into the biological adaptations that may contribute to their endemicity in tropical climates.
